doc: add "the ocaml ecosystem" (#7366)
ocaml/dune: doc/ocaml-ecosystem.rst

The OCaml ecosystem
===================

The OCaml ecosystem is not monolithic: the compiler and tools are not

> maintained by the same entities. As such, it can be difficult to understand the

Author: we can discuss copyediting typos etc later, please see my comment below.

history and roles of the various pieces of this ecosystem. The goal of this
page is to give a quick overview of the situation and of the role that Dune
plays in it.

> The compiler distribution: compiling and linking

Reviewer: Can you title case the titles?

Author: done!

> The Compiler Distribution: Compiling and Linking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OCaml Compiler Distribution: Compiling and Linking
```
also the underline

Author: FYI, you can select both lines and make a multiline suggestion

------------------------------------------------

> The compiler distribution contains "core" tools including the compilers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OCaml compiler distribution contains "core" tools including the compilers
```

(``ocamlc`` and ``ocamlopt``). They turn source files (with extensions ``.ml``
and ``.mli``) into executables and libraries. Dependencies between compiled
objects only exist at the module level, so this is a low-level tool.

> Findlib: Metadata for libraries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Findlib: Metadata for Libraries
```

-------------------------------

Findlib is a tool that defines the concept of library, so that libraries can
depend on other libraries on top of the notion of module. Definitions of
libraries, and other pieces of metadata, are stored in ``META`` files.

Findlib ships an executable named ``ocamlfind`` that can be used as a wrapper

> on top of the compilers, to perform tasks such as producing an executable from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on top of the compilers to perform tasks such as producing an executable from
```

compiled object files and external libraries.

Opam: a Collection of Software Projects
---------------------------------------

Opam is a package manager. It is used to determine which packages are
necessary, and how to fetch and build them. Packages can contain libraries,
executables, and other kinds of files.

> The notion of version is specific to opam. If your project uses a function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The notion of version is specific to ``opam``. If your project uses a function
```

Reviewer: Or Opam. There are a few other mentions below too.

Author: according to our style guide (which I'll embed a copy in the docs), it's lowercase opam, no monospace, as confirmed by the authors.

> The notion of version is specific to opam: if your project uses a function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The notion of version is specific to opam. If your project uses a function
```

named ``Png.read_file`` but this function has been added only in version
``1.2.0`` of that package, opam needs to know about it.

> OPAM manages collections of installed packages, called switches. Using your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Opam manages collections of installed packages, called switches. Using your
```

project's dependencies (names and version constraints), it is able to create a
switch that you'll be using to develop your project.

> Public definition of packages are available in a database called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Public definitions of packages are available in a database called
```

> opam-repository which is maintained as a public git repository. Publishing a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``opam-repository`` which is maintained as a public Git repository. Publishing a
```

> ``opam-repository`` which is maintained as a public Git repository. Publishing a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``opam-repository`` which is maintained as a public Git repository. Publishing a
```

Author: yes, I think it's either ``opam-repository`` or "the opam repository". the README in opam-repository doesn't use "the"

> package on opam (to make sure that external users can use your project)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package on Opam (to make sure that external users can use your project)
```

> consists in adding its definition to opam-repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consists in adding its definition to ``opam-repository``.
```

> consists in adding its definition to ``opam-repository``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consists of adding its definition to ``opam-repository``.
```

Author: I'm not a native speaker, but I don't think that this is correct. publishing a package is not made up of adding its definition to ``opam-repository``, but publishing a package is essentially adding its definition to ``opam-repository``. @christinerose is this the right distinction?

> Dune: Giving Structure to your Source Tree

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dune: Giving Structure to Your Source Tree
```

------------------------------------------

Dune is a build system. It is used to orchestrate the compilation of source
files into executables and libraries.

> Assuming you have a development switch set up, you communicate to Dune about how your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming you have a development Opam switch set up, you can tell Dune about how your
```

> Assuming you have a development switch set up, you communicate to Dune how your
> project is organized in terms of executables, libraries and tests. It is then able to assemble the source files of your projects with the dependencies installed in an opam switch, to create compiled assets for your project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assuming you have a development switch set up, you communicate to Dune about how your
project is organized in terms of executables, libraries, and tests. It is then able to assemble the source files of your projects, with the dependencies installed in an opam switch, to create compiled assets for your project.
```

> project is organized in terms of executables, libraries, and tests. It is then able to assemble the source files of your projects, with the dependencies installed in an opam switch, to create compiled assets for your project.

Reviewer: wrap pls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
project is organized in terms of executables, libraries, and tests. It is then able to assemble the source files of your projects, with any dependencies installed in your opam switch, into the compiled assets for your project.
```

> How Dune Integrates with the Ecosystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How Dune Integrates With the Ecosystem
```

--------------------------------------

> Dune is designed to integrate with this set of tools:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dune is designed to integrate with the set of tools mentioned above:
```

> - by knowing how the compilers operate, it knows which build commands should be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- By knowing how the compilers operate, it knows which build commands should be
```

> - By knowing how the compilers operate, it knows which build commands should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- By knowing how the OCaml compilers operate, it knows which build commands should be
```

  re-executed if some source files change.
- It outputs metadata like dependency information into ``META`` files that

>   Findlib is able to use. This ensures that even if a project does not use Dune, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Findlib is able to make use of. This ensures that even if a project does not use Dune, it
```

> - it outputs metadata like dependency information into ``META`` files that
>   Findlib is able to use. This ensures that a project that does not use Dune
>   can use a library that has been produced by Dune. Conversely, it can read
>   these files to determine dependency information for dependencies that have
>   not been produced by Dune.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It outputs metadata like dependency information into ``META`` files that
  Findlib is able to use. This ensures that even if a project does not use Dune, it
  can use a library that has been produced by Dune. Conversely, it can read
  these files to determine dependency information for dependencies that have
  not been produced by Dune.
```

> - It is able to generate opam files with filenames consistents with how opam

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is able to generate Opam files with filenames consistent with how Opam
```

  looks for them. The generated files use build commands that make use of the

>   ``@install`` and ``@runtest`` alias so that the Dune abstractions map to the

Reviewer: Do we want to link to the refman about these?

>   opam ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Opam ones.
```

Dune is Opinionated
-------------------

As described above, the OCaml ecosystem does not have a centralized toolchain.

> Units such as modules, libraries, and packages, operate at different levels and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Units such as modules, libraries, and packages operate at different levels, and
```

the relation between these can be confusing to users.

Dune tries to simplify the picture by reducing the difference between these
objects:

- By default, a library will only expose a single top-level module named after

>   the library.

Reviewer: Perhaps mention: This is known as a wrapped library. And then link to the reference manual.

- A library can only be installed in the package of the same name. This means
  that the names found in ``dune-project`` and ``opam`` files (package names)

>   are consistent with the names found in ``dune`` files (library names).

Reviewer: This isn't strictly true in the sense that the prefix of the library should be the package. Reading this it seems like you can only have one library per package, when in reality there can be many, just that they have to share a prefix in their public_name.

Author: I try to convey that nuance by using "consistent" rather than equal, but I'll try to be more precise.

The OCaml Ecosystem
===================

The OCaml ecosystem is not monolithic: the compiler and tools are not
maintained by the same entities. As such, it can be difficult to understand the
history and roles of the various pieces of this ecosystem. The goal of this
page is to give a quick overview of the situation and of the role that Dune
plays in it.

The OCaml Compiler Distribution: Compiling and Linking
------------------------------------------------------

> The OCaml compiler distribution contains "core" tools including the compilers

Author: done

(``ocamlc`` and ``ocamlopt``). They turn source files (with extensions ``.ml``
and ``.mli``) into executables and libraries. Dependencies between compiled
objects only exist at the module level, so this is a low-level tool.

Findlib: Metadata for Libraries
-------------------------------

> Findlib is a tool that defines the concept of library, so that libraries can

Author: done

``1.2.0`` of that package, opam needs to know about it.

Opam manages collections of installed packages, called switches. Using your
project's dependencies (names and version constraints), it is able to create a
switch that you'll be using to develop your project.

Public definitions of packages are available in a database called
``opam-repository`` which is maintained as a public Git repository. Publishing a
package on opam (to make sure that external users can use your project)
consists in adding its definition to ``opam-repository``.

Dune: Giving Structure to Your Source Tree
------------------------------------------

Dune is a build system. It is used to orchestrate the compilation of source
files into executables and libraries.

Assuming you have a development switch set up, you communicate to Dune about how your
project is organized in terms of executables, libraries, and tests. It is then able to assemble the source files of your projects, with the dependencies installed in an opam switch, to create compiled assets for your project.

How Dune Integrates With the Ecosystem
--------------------------------------

> Dune is designed to integrate with the set of tools mentioned above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dune is designed to integrate with the tools mentioned above:
```
this is a bit clearer actually
